# Monsters in the Margins: A Menagerie of Medieval Marginalia

## Annotated Bibliography

Burdick, Anne, et al. “Humanities to Digital Humanities.” *Digital_Humanities,* 2012, pp. 3–26. *direct.mit.edu,* https://direct.mit.edu/books/book/5346/chapter/3837845/HUMANITIES-TO-DIGITAL-HUMANITIES.

&nbsp; &nbsp; As the opening chapter of a book that aims to demonstrate the immense revitalizing potential that digital involvement offers to humanities scholarship, “Humanities to Digital Humanities” offers a foundational insight into the philosophy behind intertwining traditional humanities research with digital practices and tools in the first place. This chapter glosses the origins of the humanities on the whole and takes the time to chart the emergence of the digital humanities on that timeline. By mapping out the histories of both of these elements, the chapter is able to explore why incorporating digital tools into humanities pedagogy and scholarship is best poised to help humanities work adapt and remain relevant in our increasingly digital age. I am particularly interested in how the chapter describes the digital humanities as a generative practice— a pedagogy focused more concretely on adding to what already exists (10). Participating in the field of digital humanities requires an individual to be an incredibly effective writer in the same way traditional humanities research does, but also requires an individual to create something new, learn by doing, and even collaborate with their peers. In short, this source serves as a fantastic introduction to the kind of philosophy that drives digital humanities projects and thus informs the way that I have approached working on “Monsters in the Margins.” Creating a digital project adds an extra step to the traditional research process, but it is an incredibly valuable step in how additive it is to the field. I want to create new things that did not exist before— which is exactly the sort of mindset that this source seems to endorse.

Cohen, Jeffrey Jerome. “Monster Culture (Seven Theses).” *Monster Theory: Reading Culture,* University of Minnesota Press, 1996, pp. 3–25. miami-primo.com, https://miami-primo.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/permalink/f/1k369cc/TN_cdi_proquest_miscellaneous_2131026735.

&nbsp; &nbsp; The theoretical work that Cohen undertakes in “Monster Culture (Seven Theses)” is absolutely foundational to the way that this project conceptualizes notions of monstrosity, and indeed, informs the way I approach monsters in all of my research. At the core of Cohen’s argument is the idea that a monster is never *just* a monster, but that a monster is always emblematic of something else, imbued with meaning by the society that names them a monster to begin with. Cohen tells us that “[t]he monstrous body is pure culture,” for the nature of the monstrous body is shaped by a culture’s fears, desires, anxieties, fantasies, and other such latent sentiments (4). A culture can be understood by reading the bodies of the monsters it creates. Cohen’s theoretical framework around notions of monstrosity is core to the undertaking of this project, as “Monsters in the Margins” aims to compile a digital exhibit of monsters as they are depicted in the margins of medieval manuscripts for a variety of reasons, but primarily in order to identify if any trends emerge among the various collected images. It would follow that, by Cohen’s logic, some meaning could be gleaned by observing all these margin monsters together in one place. To put it simply: “Monsters are our children” (20). The monster does not emerge from a vacuum, but rather, is shaped by human hands— and the shape of a monster should indicate something about the culture of the humans who created it.

D’Ignazio, Catherine, and Lauren Klein. “4. ‘What Gets Counted Counts.’” *Data Feminism,* 2020. *data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu,* https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/h1w0nbqp/release/3.

&nbsp; &nbsp; The heart of this chapter is captured perfectly by its title: the only things that count are whatever things actually get counted. This chapter confronts head-on one of the largest avenues by which bias creeps into the interpretation of data. Contrary to popular belief, data is far from objective. While the subjectivity of data can appear in multiple ways, at different levels of a project, and present with varying severities, sometimes it really is as simple as the fact that ultimately, it is a human who is deciding what data is going to be interpreted at all. A human decides the scope of a project and what metrics will be utilized, which means that, by choosing what data is “in” the project, a human is also choosing what data is “out” of it. This is not an inherently bad phenomenon, especially given that it is very much unavoidable, but this chapter highlights the importance of at least considering this variable of digital humanities work. I have included this source here because it has made me incredibly cognizant of the fact that, because this project is very much a one-woman, small-scale operation, there is a lot of data that simply will not make it into this digital curation. I simply cannot include every monster that has ever appeared in medieval marginalia in this project. However, being conscious of this limitation ensures that I can at least address it. Within my goal of 20-40 examples, I can ensure that there are a wide array of monstrous examples from different manuscripts. That said, while maintaining a diversity of examples and sources is important, I also want to make sure that there are “comparables” within the set. That is, I want to have more than one “hybrid” monster in the set, so comparisons could be drawn between “hybrid” type monsters. Or, as another example, simply including more than one monster from the same manuscript— not enough to dominate the set, but at least two or three, so that a user can have more than one example to compare with. Walking this balance is difficult given the smaller sample size of this project, but it is important to consider when what gets counted is all that counts.

&nbsp; —. “5. Unicorns, Janitors, Ninjas, Wizards, and Rock Stars.” *Data Feminism,* 2020. *data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu,* https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/2wu7aft8/release/3.

&nbsp; &nbsp; The direct follow-up to the previous chapter in this book addresses another means by which subjectivity can enter a dataset: by “cleaning” the data itself. The chapter actually opens by considering the Anti-Eviction Mapping Project, a case study of a project that has had to creatively address the complex nature of the data they are collecting, especially while upholding its commitment to antiracist, feminist, and decolonial methodology (D’Ignazio & Klein). Their data is not “clean,” because the reality of the information that they are tracking is not clean. “Cleaning” their data would smooth and homogenize the diverse circumstances they are recording, and would thus introduce significant error or bias into their project. This case study is an effective chapter opener in that it utterly ruptures the myth that data science is largely data cleaning. I have included this source here because it has prompted me to consider the way in which I present the “data” aspect of this project. In some ways, I cannot avoid “cleaning” the data, as Wax derives and displays its online curations from a managed spreadsheet; I will have to standardize data in order to have a functioning website. However, I think the solution to this is to be transparent about what “cleaning” was done in order to make the data presentable to strangers. I may choose to allow users to view the spreadsheet, and take notes on a separate sheet whenever changes are implemented or “cleaning” is undertaken.

&nbsp; —. “6. The Numbers Don’t Speak for Themselves.” *Data Feminism,* 2020. *data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu,* https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/czq9dfs5/release/3.

&nbsp; &nbsp; This chapter concerns itself with the interpretation of data, and as was the case with the previous citation, I do think transparency will be the best way to address some of the problems this chapter brings to light. The key takeaway from this chapter is that “all knowledge is *situated,”* or, put more simply, context matters (D’Ignazio & Klein). It is far too easy for data to become separated from its context, especially given the “Wild West” nature of the Internet. When data is removed from its context, it becomes incredibly easy to misinterpret that data entirely. Data without context is much like data that has not been curated with thought given to what is not being counted— it is not an accurate representation of the whole picture, as it were. While the data for the “Monsters in the Margins” is largely just images of monsters in marginalia and the citation/source information for those digitized images, that is important context that should not be dissevered from the data. Of course, Wax helpfully ensures that information stays together, both on a spreadsheet and on website display, but this is not the only aspect of “context” worth considering here. It is important to note that the contemporary understanding of monstrosity is far different than the medieval understanding of monstrosity. While I certainly want users to engage with these margin monsters on their own terms— and there is no way to remove the fact that we *are* approaching these monsters with a contemporary understanding— I think it is vitally important to keep in mind the actual medieval context that these monsters were created in. It is for this reason that I think my sources on monstrosity are incredibly important to present the “full picture” of this project, as I intend to write a small introduction to the material and medieval conceptualizations of monstrosity to append to the project website, which will hopefully ensure that users have access to a more full context for the data they are accessing.

Drucker, Johanna. “Digitization.” *The Digital Humanities Coursebook: An Introduction to Digital Methods for Research and Scholarship,* 2021.

&nbsp; &nbsp; Drucker’s chapter on the digitization of real-world materials is a down-to-earth and easy-to-read introduction to such practices, and has served as a primer of sorts before delving into the more hands-on aspects of web development and coding. Only the basics of HTML coding are covered, but the core aim of this chapter is not to serve as a web development tutorial, and more to simply introduce readers to the concept of digitization and why it is valuable, as well as what concerns should be addressed when working with HTML. She considers issues of accessibility, access, template use, and code copying, and presents them in a simplified manner that is palatable even for individuals who might be completely new to anything related to the digital humanities. This is all summarized in a very brief “Takeaway” section that she bookends the chapter with. In all, Drucker’s work in this chapter serves as a helpful bridge between the more philosophy-oriented approach presented in “Humanities to Digital Humanities” and the more hands-on approach presented in Turkel and Crymble’s “Understanding Web Pages and HTML.” It is a short and simple chapter, meant to establish the most basic concepts— both idealogical and practical— that inform digitization work, which is very much relevant given the nature of the “Monsters in the Margins” project.

Dunthorne, Anna. “How to Approach a Monster: A Comparison of Different Approaches in the Historiography of Early Modern Monster Literature.” *History Compass,* vol. 6, no. 4, July 2008, pp. 1107–20.

&nbsp; &nbsp; This essay considers monsters on two separate levels, both of which are valuable to consider when contextualizing the work being undertaken for this project. First, Dunthorne considers the nature of monstrosity as it would have been interpreted in the early modern period— as omens and portents sent by God. Second, Dunthorne charts the ways in which historians have interpreted monstrous literature as representative of difference, morality, and influence, and confronts head-on the ways in which “modernising narratives” may have and may continue to influence the way contemporary historians conceive of monstrosity. The latter aim is the main focus of the essay by far, but the former is included and does provide valuable insight into the early modern conception of monsters. This essay does phenomenal work of charting the interpretations of monsters, and thus serves as a valuable source with which to situate the “Monsters in the Margins” project within the larger context of monster studies, especially in earlier time periods. However, it is worth noting that this source focuses on early modern monsters, not medieval monstrosities. While there is a difference between the medieval and the early modern, I am of the opinion that the understanding of monstrosity in these two separate time periods is similar enough that this still serves as a valuable source for this project. It provides valuable insight into monstrosity within the time period, as well as the work of historians who are interpreting those depictions of monstrosity, and both of those elements are important to contextualizing the monsters being collected for this project. In the interest of full disclosure, this time discrepancy will be noted in the introduction to this project, and supplemented further by sources focused on monstrosity in the medieval period.

Giffney, Noreen, and Myra J. Hird, editors. *Queering the Non/Human.* Ashgate, 2008. *miami-primo.com,* https://miami-primo.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/permalink/f/1k369cc/TN_cdi_informaworld_taylorfrancisbooks_9781315603308.

&nbsp; &nbsp; This book serves in a similar capacity as Cohen’s “Monster Culture (Seven Theses),” as it is a collection of chapters by various authors that are focused on exploring queer interpretations of non-humans, which can and does include monstrosity. Of particular value to this project are the chapters titled “Queering the Un/Godly: Christ’s Humanities and Medieval Sexualities” and “The Werewolf as Queer, the Queer as Werewolf, and Queer Werewolves,” both of which consider the nonhuman, the monstrous, and the aberrant within medieval contexts. The latter chapter mentioned especially considers notions of monstrosity within the medieval period. This source can thus supplement and augment the information presented in some of the other sources cited here that are primarily focused on the early modern instead of the medieval. Moreover, these chapters, and indeed, the book at large, offer some frameworks of queer theory that might be useful in interpreting some of the monstrous marginalia that is collected as part of this project. Again, the monster’s body is a cultural one, where cultural fears and desires are made manifest. Queer frameworks align well with Cohen’s conceptualizations of monster theory, and so this book is a worthwhile fit for what it contributes both in historical and theoretical terms.

Knoppers, Laura Lunger, and Joan B. Landes, editors. *Monstrous Bodies/Political Monstrosities: In Early Modern Europe.* Cornell University Press, 2004.

&nbsp; &nbsp; This book, edited by Laura Lunger Knoppers and Joan B. Landes, is composed of chapters written by various authors, all of which focus on reading monstrosity in the early modern period as expressions of political sentiment. As mentioned previously, Cohen calls the monstrous body a cultural body, and those who participated in the creation of this book seem to agree, as they read various instances and presentations of monstrosity as demonstrative of political occurrences in the time period. The introduction is particularly valuable in discussing the ways in which individuals of the early modern period interpreted monstrosity, drawing from the medieval interpretation of monstrosity as a portent of God. The core belief around which the chapters of this book orbit is summarized as follows:

“Thus, the progressive narrative, in which the monstrous moves from potent to science, undervalues the political, polemical, and judicial uses of monstrous imagery throughout the early modern period. Monstrous bodies carry the weight of political, social, and sexual aberration or transgression: the borders of the known and the acceptable are marked by the construction of the monstrous Other.” (8)

Of course, this source is similar to Dunthorne’s in that it is very much focused on the early modern period, rather than the medieval. As such, certain chapters that focus on the tail end of the early modern period, where conceptions of monstrosity had certainly shifted away from medieval understands, are not quite so useful to this project. However, some of the chapters do consider medieval understandings of monstrosity, and contend with instances in the early modern where those same beliefs were held. Besides the introduction, other chapters of value include: “Frontiers of the Monstrous: Perceiving National Characters in Early Modern Europe” by Peter Burke, “A Time for Monsters: Monstrous Births, Propaganda, and the German Reformation” by R. Po-chia Hsia, and “Monstrous Medicine” by Marie-Hélène Huet.

Siehl, Caitlyn. “Start Here.” *What We Buried,* 2014.

&nbsp; &nbsp; The annotation for this particular citation will be brief. This is the poem from which I am intending to draw an epigraph for this project’s introduction page. The specific quote is, “When is a monster not a monster? Oh, when you love it.” I feel the quote encapsulates perfectly the affection I feel towards monsters, and all the meaning that medieval monsters have carried for centuries. The term “monster” hardly rings to me with any negative connotation anymore, as I simply love the creatures that run around in our imagination, and have for time immemorial. This not at all an academic source, hence the brief annotation, but these are someone else’s words, so it deserves a citation in this bibliography regardless.

Turkel, William J., and Adam Crymble. “Understanding Web Pages and HTML.” *Programming Historian,* July 2012. *programminghistorian.org,* https://programminghistorian.org/en/lessons/viewing-html-files.

&nbsp; &nbsp; This lesson in HTML, which is divided into 15 brief sections, is the most practical source on this bibliography, as far as actual web coding works. The best way to phrase it is that Turkel and Crymble write in the same vein as Drucker’s simple, efficient writing style, but choose to wholly focus on the practical elements that go into a digital humanities project, as opposed to only the basics with more of a focus on ideological concerns. In this sense, it is the perfect follow-up to Drucker’s work, in the same way Drucker was the perfect follow-up to “Humanities to Digital Humanities,” at least when the end goal is to actually code a project yourself. While I already have some experience coding with HTML, having such a useful and simple to parse “lesson” to refer back to is absolutely invaluable. Even the basics of HTML can be easy to forget when you stare at written code for long enough, which is primarily why this source is so helpful. That said, not all of the lessons are applicable to the work that I am doing with “Monsters in the Margins.” For example, a significant number of the later sections concern themselves with learning Python code and practicing Python applications, which, while very useful, is not within the scope of this project. The ones that are relevant, however, are incredibly helpful, and I will continue to refer back to them as I build the project website.

Walsham, Alexandra. *Providence in Early Modern England.* University Press, 2001. *miami-primo.com,* https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198208877.001.0001.

&nbsp; &nbsp; This book, like many of the other sources listed here, offers historical insight into the way monstrosity was interpreted in the medieval and early modern period. More specifically, this book is focused on the Protestant religion as it pertains to interpretations of “providence,” or God’s divine will. While this book is, much like some of the other sources here, more focused on the early modern period, there are enough references to medieval interpretations of monstrosity to render this book a helpful source for this project. Of particular interest is the introduction, as well as a chapter titled, “‘Tongues of Heaven’: Prodigies, Portents, and Prophets.” The ways in which monstrosity is conceptualized within this chapter, despite focusing on the early modern period, still aligns with medieval interpretations of monstrosity as omens and potents of God’s higher will in response or warning to human behavior. The monstrous body is thus imbued with a multitude of meanings and interpretations within the medieval and early modern imagination. Walsham’s work offers an interpretation of monstrosity that differs from the political reading presented in *Monstrous Bodies/Political Monstrosities* and the more modern queer readings presented in *Queering the Non/Human.* It also differs significantly from Cohen’s approach, although it aligns at a baseline, in the sense that Walsham must believe that the monstrous body holds meaning beyond itself, especially within medieval and early modern conceptions. The writing presented in this book aligns more closely with Dunthorne’s approach, which offers this project an additional source with strong historical references with which to better contextualize the monsters being presented in the project.