<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <title>Monsters in the Margins: A Menagerie of Medieval Marginalia</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        
        <p>Burdick, Anne, et al. “Humanities to Digital Humanities.” <i>Digital_Humanities,</i> 2012, pp. 3–26. <i>direct.mit.edu,</i> https://direct.mit.edu/books/book/5346/chapter/3837845/HUMANITIES-TO-DIGITAL-HUMANITIES.</p>
        
        <p>Cohen, Jeffrey Jerome. “Monster Culture (Seven Theses).” <i>Monster Theory: Reading Culture,</i> University of Minnesota Press, 1996, pp. 3–25. miami-primo.com, https://miami-primo.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/permalink/f/1k369cc/TN_cdi_proquest_miscellaneous_2131026735.</p>
        
        <p>D’Ignazio, Catherine, and Lauren Klein. “4. ‘What Gets Counted Counts.’” <i>Data Feminism,</i> 2020. <i>data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu,</i> https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/h1w0nbqp/release/3.</p>
        
        <p>—. “5. Unicorns, Janitors, Ninjas, Wizards, and Rock Stars.” <i>Data Feminism,</i> 2020. <i>data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu,</i> https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/2wu7aft8/release/3.</p>
        
        <p>—. “6. The Numbers Don’t Speak for Themselves.” <i>Data Feminism,</i> 2020. <i>data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu,</i> https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/czq9dfs5/release/3.</p>
        
        <p>Drucker, Johanna. “Digitization.” <i>The Digital Humanities Coursebook: An Introduction to Digital Methods for Research and Scholarship,</i> 2021.</p>
        
        <p>Dunthorne, Anna. “How to Approach a Monster: A Comparison of Different Approaches in the Historiography of Early Modern Monster Literature.” <i>History Compass,</i> vol. 6, no. 4, July 2008, pp. 1107–20.</p>
        
        <p>Giffney, Noreen, and Myra J. Hird, editors. <i>Queering the Non/Human.</i> Ashgate, 2008. <i>miami-primo.com,</i> https://miami-primo.hosted.exlibrisgroup.com/permalink/f/1k369cc/TN_cdi_informaworld_taylorfrancisbooks_9781315603308.</p>
        
        <p>Knoppers, Laura Lunger, and Joan B. Landes, editors. <i>Monstrous Bodies/Political Monstrosities: In Early Modern Europe.</i> Cornell University Press, 2004.</p>
        
        <p>Siehl, Caitlyn. “Start Here.” <i>What We Buried,</i> 2014.</p>
        
        <p>Turkel, William J., and Adam Crymble. “Understanding Web Pages and HTML.” <i>Programming Historian,</i> July 2012. <i>programminghistorian.org,</i> https://programminghistorian.org/en/lessons/viewing-html-files.</p>
        
        <p>Walsham, Alexandra. <i>Providence in Early Modern England.</i> University Press, 2001. <i>miami-primo.com,</i> https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198208877.001.0001.</p>
        
        
    </body>
</html>